>> I met Stan Grof
in early 1977.
At that time I had published
my first book, "The Tao
of Physics" two years earlier.
It had been a big success.
I got a lot of
invitations to lectures,
to professional associations and
organizations from all fields
and had discussions with
people from many disciplines
and people from
every walk of life.
And surprisingly there
were many psychologists
and psychotherapists
among these people.
And they told me that
the kind of paradigm
shift that I described
in "The Tao of Physics,"
a shift from a mechanistic
worldview to a holistic view
was happening also
in their field.
At that time you had
humanistic psychology
and its various tributaries.
And so in those
discussions, the name
Stan Grof was often mentioned.
And so I was very curious
about Stan and was
delighted when I got an
invitation to a small gathering
in the private
home of about maybe
10, 15 people where Stan would
present a summary of his work.
So I went there.
And when I met Stan I was very
surprised because I had always
heard people refer
to him as Stan Grof.
And I didn't associate
anything with him.
And when I saw
him and heard him,
I immediately knew
that he was Czech.
And then I learned that
his full name is Stanislav.
And to me this was
a big experience
because I was born in Vienna,
and Stan was born in Prague.
The two cities are just
about 100 kilometers apart.
And moreover, the Czech culture
and the Viennese culture
are very closely intermingled.
There are many Czechs in Vienna.
And the two countries
have influenced
one another very much.
So meeting Stan was sort of
like meeting a distant cousin,
you know?
First of all, I realized he was
European, which I didn't know.
But in the first two seconds
I knew he was European.
And then I realized
that he was Czech.
And he was very familiar
to me in some sense.
So there was a kind of
intimacy right from the start.
And this intimacy was enhanced
by Stan's very warm and open
personality which everybody
who knows him knows.
And so from that evening on,
our relationship very quickly
developed into a
close friendship.
Of course I was very
excited about his work,
and he about mine.
So there was this
intellectual connection.
But there was also a very
strong emotional and cultural
connection because we came
from the same part of Europe.
And so in the following
months in 1977
I visited Stan several times
at Esalen, where he lived,
had many discussions with him.
And then we planned
the seminars together,
which we call "Journeys
Beyond Space and Time."
And those were an inner
journey and an outer journey,
the inner journey of
transpersonal experiences,
mystical experiences,
psychedelic experiences,
and so on, and the outer
journey of physicists
delving into matter at the
atomic and subatomic level.
And those were a series
of very exciting seminars.
I presented the worldview,
the perception of reality
that emerged in atomic
and subatomic physics
where the solid objects
of our everyday experience
dissolve into energy patterns
and where particles can travel
backward and forward in
time, where these energy
patterns furthermore are
intrinsically dynamic,
the whole universe being
a cosmic dance of energy.
And so Stan was describing
very similar experiences
when he talked about psychedelic
and transpersonal experiences.
And as I did, he
was comparing them
to the experience of mystics.
And so now we had
three perspectives,
the mystical experience, the
transpersonal experience,
and the experience
of physicists,
in those subatomic experiments.
And so I usually would
start the seminar.
And by the time
Stan got to speak,
people had heard about all
these strange appearances which
were part of theories
by Nobel laureates
and the most respected
of the sciences.
So I brought a lot of
prestige to these seminars,
not that Stan didn't
have prestige.
But still hearing it from
two sides, psychology,
transpersonal psychology
and subatomic physics,
reinforced the
concepts considerably.
And so people were much
more open to his ideas
after hearing me.
>> And can I ask, what in
particular about that research
into the subatomic dimension
around is important to know?
>> Well, what is important
to know is really that
at the subatomic level there
are no separate objects,
that a subatomic particle,
an electron or a proton,
for a physicist is not an object
but is a set of relationships
that reach outward
to other things.
And then when you ask, what
are these other things,
they are again sets
of relationships.
And you never end up
with any "things" at all.
You always end up
with relationships.
So it's a world of patterns,
of relationships, of processes.
And this is now part of
a very general paradigm
shift in the sciences
and in society at large,
that we are no longer
seeing the world
as a machine made of some
kind of basic building blocks.
We are beginning to
understand it as a network
or as networks within networks.
And so that key insight that
in science appeared first
in physics has now appeared
in biology and medicine
and in economics and
various other sciences.
That's, I think,
the very essence.
>> And that would
be systems theory?
>> That's systems theory.
That's what I call the
systems view of life.
There's a new
conception of life.
So after writing "The Tao of
Physics" and my second book,
"The Turning Point," where I
applied this to other areas,
in particular biology, medicine,
psychology, and economics,
after that I spent the next
30 years integrating what
I call the systems view of life,
a new conception of life that
has now emerged in science.
And Stan was one
of the very first
and certainly the
most important one
to give this new
conception of life
and this new
perception of reality
an emotional content and
experiential content.
I think this is one of his
many great contributions.
>> Experiential in the sense
that when people have these
deep experiences, they get
the picture of relationships?
>> Yes.
Yes, it's not an
intellectual exercise.
When I say that a subatomic
particle is essentially
a set of relationships,
you can try
to wrap your mind around
it intellectually.
But you can also experience it.
And Stan helps people
to experience it.
And he analyzes
experiences of mystics,
of psychotics,
psychotic experiences,
psychedelic experiences.
And he ties it all together.
>> Yeah, it's pretty powerful.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I ask here, how did
your interactions with Stan
influence your thinking or
understanding of what you had
been working on?
>> Well, Stan's influence
on my work in the late 1960s
and early 1980s was enormous,
absolutely enormous.
At that time I had
decided to write
a second book about
the paradigm shift
from the mechanistic to
the holistic worldview
in various fields,
starting from physics
but then moving on to
biology, psychology, medicine,
and economics.
And in these fields
I had no expertise.
And I couldn't
start reading books
because I wouldn't
know where to start.
And so I decided very early
on to work with people.
And I developed a
skill and a talent
to recognize people in
meetings and conferences,
people who were
experts in their fields
and who shared my vision
of this paradigm shift.
And Stan was one of them.
And on the first evening
actually when I met him,
when he presented the
summary of his work,
he presented this cartography
of the unconscious
that he developed.
And this cartography allowed
him to integrate various schools
of psychology and psychotherapy,
psychoanalysis, and so on
which were often
contradictory but which
he said were addressing
different levels
of the unconscious.
And so not only did he know
a lot about psychology,
he also had a framework to
integrate these various schools
of psychology.
And of course for me this
was tremendously helpful.
But there's more to it.
My basic premise for this
book, "The Turning Point,"
was that the various sciences
in the 18th and 19th centuries
had modeled themselves
after Newtonian physics,
had adopted a
mechanistic outlook.
And now it was time to change.
And now there was this
paradigm shift happening
in the other sciences.
And so in psychology
it's quite easy to see
how behaviorism, one of the
main schools of 20th century
psychology, how behaviorism
had this mechanistic outlook,
because instead of
studying consciousness,
those psychologists sort
of eliminated consciousness
and concentrated
purely on behavior
and analyzed behavior in
very mechanistic terms,
in terms of reflexes and so on.
And so that's
fairly easy to see.
But to see how Freud
modeled his psychoanalysis
after Newtonian physics
is much more subtle.
And that's what helped
Stan helped me to do,
what Stan showed me.
And he sort of tutored
me in psychoanalysis
and Freud's theory and showed
how in very subtle ways,
this is also modeled
after Newtonian physics.
Furthermore the whole
notion of mental illness
that Stan developed was very
influential on my thinking
and has been so since
the present day actually.
Stan saw two types of
human experiences--
our everyday
experience, which you
can call a Cartesian
experience, where
we have our environment
consisting of separate objects.
Time flows in a linear way.
There are cause-and-effect
relationships and so on.
And then you have the
transpersonal experiences
where there are no separate
objects, where there
are webs of relationships,
energy patterns,
flows, everything is
moving, vibrating, dancing,
no strict cause-and-effect
relationships.
So you have these two
types of experiences.
And according to Stan, mental
illness occurs when people
cannot integrate those
two experiences properly.
So the way to recognize
mental illness
is not by the contents
of the experience
but rather by the inability
to integrate experiences.
And so this is very
revolutionary and very
important for
therapy because still
today in most of
psychiatry when people
have psychotic experiences,
these experiences
are suppressed with drugs.
What Stan says is,
on the contrary,
you should not suppress them.
You should allow them to
emerge and come to a conclusion
and integration.
So Stan saw psychotic symptoms,
or symptoms of mental illness,
as frozen experiences.
And these frozen experiences
need to be unfrozen.
And he would do this with
LSD initially and then
with these other
techniques and be
allowed to come to conclusion.
Now, for me this was very
exciting because when
I met Stan Grof,
around the same time
I also met RD Laing, the
Scottish psychiatrist who
did very revolutionary work in
the treatment of mental illness
and who had exactly
the same view as Stan--
expressed it
slightly differently,
but it was exactly
the same thing.
And he had a very
activist approach,
protesting against the habits
of psychiatric hospitals
of constraining patients
against their will and so on,
not recognizing them as
authentic human beings
and so on.
But the basic model of mental
illness of Laing and Grof
is very similar.
So for me this was a
very exciting time,
the late '70s, early '80s.
Well, after Stan and
I became friends,
he often invited me to
a very special seminar
that he and his wife,
Christina, organized at Esalen.
It was a month-long seminar.
And at Esalen it was simply
known as the "Grof Month-Long."
And during one month,
they had a small group
of people, of maybe 20 people,
living together at Esalen
for a whole month.
And he would invite a string of
guest lecturers moving through,
each one staying two or three
days, presenting something
quite extraordinary,
some radically new ideas,
some really significant work.
And they would combine this with
experiential work, with what
everybody at the time just
called Grof breathing,
the Holotropic breathing.
And so they had sessions
of Holotropic breathing.
They had sessions of
meditation, of art and crafts.
They lived together
almost like a tribe.
And that was mainly
Christina Grof
who built this
learning community
like a tribe with a lot of
aesthetics in an absolutely
beautiful, sensuous environment
with sensuous experiences,
the Esalen hot baths, the
meditation, the breathing
exercises, plus
intellectual stimulation.
So this was really an
extraordinary time.
And I participated in many
of these month-long seminars.
And for me this was a time of
both personal and intellectual
expansion and growth.
Well, I have many
memories from that period.
But I think one that
I'd like to mention
is that in 1978, in
the summer of '78,
Stan and Christina went
on a long lecture tour.
I don't remember
where they went.
But they were away
for several weeks.
And they let me
stay in their house.
So I stayed at this
Grof house just north
of the Esalen Institute.
And it was a small
wooden cottage
with a room with big glass
windows on two sides right
above the Pacific
Ocean with a big deck
outside right above the waves,
where the waves hit the rocks.
And so you would hear the
sound of the waves, the rhythm
of the ocean day and night.
And I stayed there
for several weeks
working on my manuscript, the
manuscript of "The Turning
Point."
And I remember that I would
go to Esalen for dinner
but would spend the time
alone working during the day.
And so I would get
up in the morning.
And it was often foggy and cold.
So I would put on a
sweater or a sweatshirt
and would start work always
with the windows and doors
open, the breeze coming
in from the ocean.
And as the sun rose, I
would move my small table
to stay in the shade.
And at the same time, the
temperature would rise.
It would get warmer and warmer.
I would undress layer by layer.
And at the end, I would
be in a t-shirt sweating
in the hot sun.
And then in the afternoon, it
was the opposite, you know?
When the sun went down,
it got cooler and cooler.
And I would end up
in my sweater again.
And to make it even more
meditative, I built a sundial.
So I didn't use a watch.
I had my sundial to
see what time it was.
So it was a really meditative
experience, full of work
but very meditative
in the rhythms
of nature at the same time.
At the time in the
1970s, in the late '70s
when I was working on
"The Turning Point,"
I tried to describe the paradigm
shift in the life sciences--
biology, medicine,
psychology, economics,
the life and social sciences.
And I realized that
physics was not
the right model for
describing these other fields.
The conceptual
framework of physics
was not sufficient because
physics doesn't deal with life.
Physics deals with
non-living phenomena.
And so I needed a
different framework.
And I discovered systems
theory, cybernetics,
and started putting
together a synthesis
of what I called already then
the systems view of life.
And over the last 30 years,
I've been working on that.
When I wrote "The
Turning Point,"
this framework was visible
to me only in its outlines.
But since then, I wrote
several other books
where I completed the
synthesis more and more.
And finally in 2014, I published
a textbook called actually
"The Systems View
of Life," published
by Cambridge
University Press, where
I present the full synthesis.
And so I would say in
relationship to Stan's work,
the major novelty
in science has been
complexity theory and chaos
theory and cognitive science,
which didn't exist at the time.
There is a theory called the
Santiago theory of cognition
which sees mind as a process,
the process of commission,
and identifies it very closely
with the very process of life.
So mind and life are very
intimately connected.
And the relationship
between mind and matter
is one between
process and structure.
This is a very novel idea which
didn't exist in the 1970s.
And so I think this is the major
change, the major progress.
But it doesn't negate
anything of what
we discussed in the '70s.
And the fact that
Stan's work has
added the emotional and
experiential dimension
to these ideas is
still fully valid.
In complexity theory,
one major discovery,
and to me the most
important discovery,
is a process that is
usually known as emergence.
So what's happening is that
when you have a living organism,
as we all know,
living organisms are
able to maintain themselves
in a state of balance
during their lifespan.
And this is known
technically as homeostasis.
But every now and then
such a living system
will encounter an imbalance.
And sometimes this imbalance
will become so strong
because of feedback loops
and various processes,
internal processes, that
there is a state of crisis,
a state of
instability or crisis.
And at that point, the
system may either break down.
Or what occurs much
more frequently,
it may break through to
a new state of order,
with a new state of balance.
So this process of the
emergence of novelty
at critical points
of instability
is, to me, the most important
discovery of complexity theory.
And this is exactly
the process that Stan
described when he says that
the symptoms of mental illness
are frozen.
And when you unfreeze them,
then they break through.
And a new state of
being, a new experience
emerges from the completion
of these transpersonal
experiences.
And so the life
sciences have now
given a theoretical model
including a mathematical model
to this notion.
And the same notion around
the same time in the 1960s
and 1970s was
developed by RD Laing,
who said that madness
need not be a breakdown.
It can also be a breakthrough.
So this has now found
a scientific framework
within biology and
the life sciences.
To me that's maybe the
most important change
since those days.
And it fully
vindicates Stan's work.
>> And it kind of speaks
to where we're presently
at as a species on this
planet, doesn't it?
>> Absolutely yes because
we are definitely in a state
of crisis.
We have a multifaceted
global crisis.
And when you study
our global crisis,
the most striking
characteristic is
that the major problems of our
time are all interconnected.
You cannot solve energy alone
or economics alone or health
or violence and war, economic
inequality, climate change.
All these problems
are interconnected and
interdependent.
And ultimately they come back
to a crisis of perception,
applying an outdated worldview
to the current globally
interconnected world.
>> That's fabulous, by the way.
So next question,
what are your thoughts
regarding what it
will take for humanity
to survive the current dilemma
that it's created for itself?
>> Well, we need two changes.
One is this very profound
shift of perception from--
and which is also a
shift of metaphors,
seeing the world as a machine to
understanding it as a network.
If you look at
medicine, for instance,
conventional medicine sees
the human body as a machine,
separates it from the mind.
When you go to a
hospital, they would
try and influence the
mechanisms of the body
by giving you drugs
or applying surgery.
Nobody cares what
you eat, for example.
Hospital food is very well
known to be usually very bad.
They don't realize that
it's all one process.
The mind is separated
and so on and so forth.
The same way with the management
of human organizations.
They're talking about
re-engineering organizations,
about fine tuning the economy
as if it were a machine.
And it just goes on and on.
So the shift from the machine to
the network is very important.
But equally important, I
think, is the shift of values,
that we need to shift
from, let's say,
egocentric values to
ecocentric values.
And one of the things
that impressed me
from the very early days
in my discussions with Stan
was that he reported
when people go
through these
transpersonal experiences
and these experiential
therapies,
they come out with
different sets of values.
Suddenly material
possessions seem
less important and
human relationships
become more important.
That's exactly
the shift we need.
So this new conception
of life that
has emerged in the last
30 years or so in science
is essentially a
shift of perception
from seeing the world as a
machine to understanding it
as a network.
We have discovered that
the material world is not
made of some basic
building blocks
but is an inseparable
network of relationships.
We have also discovered
that the planet as a whole
is a living,
self-regulating system.
That's the famous Gaia theory.
Correspondingly, the
human body is no longer
seen as the machine.
And the mind is no longer
seen as a separate entity.
But rather, we have come to
realize that every living
organism, every part
of a living organism,
every tissue in our body,
every bodily organ, in fact,
every single cell is a living
and a cognitive system--
so life and cognition
always closely interrelated.
Evolution is no longer seen
as a competitive struggle
for existence but rather as
some kind of cooperative dance
in which creativity and
the emergence of novelty
are the driving forces.
And with the increased
emphasis on relationships,
patterns of organization,
complexity, and so on,
a whole new science of qualities
is now slowly emerging.
So this just is, in
a nutshell, what I
call the systems view of life.
And I call it the
systems view of life
because it requires a
new kind of thinking
to be understood,
which is thinking
in terms of relationships,
in terms of patterns,
in terms of context.
And in science, this is
known as systems thinking
or systemic thinking.
And this is what I've been
working on over the last 30
years or so.
Well, I should maybe add that
one thing we didn't talk about
was that spirituality
is always very
much at the center
of Stan's work.
I mean, he doesn't address
it directly all the time,
often he does but not always.
But it's always there in
the background as a core
because this transpersonal
experience ultimately
is a spiritual experience.
And so he always
makes these links
to various spiritual traditions.
And I should also mention
that one of the things
that Stan has done for
me was to invite me
to a major conference in
India, in Bombay in 1980.
And it was about modern
science and Eastern mysticism.
And there were lots and
lots of speakers there.
And it was my
first trip to India
and a big experience for me.
And that's another
thing I owe to Stan.